## Hell Yeah, Science!

In case you haven't been paying attention, my [about page](/about/) indicates
that I am about to graduate with a degree in Physics, specifically the
experimental kind. I still have an unalloyed love of physics and the natural
sciences, and so from time to time you'll find that posts on this blog turn to
the natural sciences. This is the first of these.

This post was brought on, in part, because of a game of Trivial Pursuit I
played with my friends from University on holiday in the Lake District (which,
incidentally, is why I haven't posted recently). Aside from reminding my
friend and I of why we hate Trivial Pursuit, a small incident in the game
stayed with me well past the game's conclusion. The incident occurred as
follows:

One team was asked the question: "What colour is the light from the hottest
stars?" (For the benefit of those of you who do not remember your high school
physics classes, the answer to this question is blue. The physics of this I
will touch upon later in this post.) This question is perfectly fair and
legitimate. The team so-asked were unfamiliar with the notion that the stars
had different colours, and ended up providing as a guess the answer "Indigo."
The person who asked the question responded with the hint: "Can you give me a
primary colour?"

At the time, I was displeased with the providing of such a hint as a response
to an incorrect answer. Afterwards, however, what stuck with me was not the
blatant cheating (OK, so it stuck with me a bit), but the nature of the hint:
"Can you give me a primary colour?"

### Get Over It

"What's wrong with that as a hint?", I hear you ask. "Blue *is* a primary
colour, so the hint was leading towards the correct answer!" Considered in the
context of the game itself, the hint is totally understandable, if outside the
rules a little bit.

Here's what bothered me: stars don't only come in primary colours. The fact
that blue, a possible (and commonish) stellar colour, is a primary colour is
pure happenstance. The colours stars can have fall on and in-between the
following colours: blue, white, yellow, orange, red.

"Alright, so what? So the hint had no relationship to the scientific reality
of the situation. Why does that matter?", you say. Here's why.

Modern scientific understanding is built on the work done by nearly
innumerable scientists past. For each tiny bit of understanding added to the
vast library of scientific knowledge of the natural world, for every scientist
who is credited with the explanation or discovery of a given phenomenon,
hundreds of scientists laboured in obscurity in an attempt to explain it, and
hundreds more provided the earlier knowledge required to build the
foundational knowledge for the explanation.

Huge praise is heaped, quite rightly, on scientists who discover and explain
the world. [Einstein](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein),
[Hawking](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Hawking), and
[Newton](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Newton) are names well-known to
the general public. To those types, we can add those whose fame lies largely
within the field: [Feynman](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Feynman),
[Bohr](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niels_Bohr), and
Bragg ([Bragg Junior](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawrence_Bragg) and
[Bragg Senior](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sir_William_Bragg)), for example.
These men and women were and are great minds, giants amongst our species, who
provided invaluable assistance to humanity's ongoing quest to understand and
explain the world around us, and the praise heaped upon them at least as
deserved as that provided to any other person in the history of humanity.

However, behind each of these giants stand the legion of the unsung; those
scientists who laboured for a lifetime to attempt to push the boundaries of
human knowledge
[just a bit further](http://matt.might.net/articles/phd-school-in-pictures/).
Their names aren't referred to in discussions of notable scientists or in
popular science books, and their names are never the answer to questions in
Trivial Pursuit. They devoted their lives to the pursuit of a worthy goal, and
earned themselves exactly no fame.

As a result, when a phenomenon that required years and buckets of ingenuity to
explain is belittled or reduced to less than it is, those who do that
reduction are injuring not just those whose names are attached to the
phenomenon in question but those who lived and died anonymously in search of
the explanation.

It is important to remember that off-hand devaluations of science are more
than just insults to reality: they are insults to hundreds of dead unknowns.
And that's just poor taste.

### The Physics

After having been on that rant, I feel like I should step aside for a moment
to indicate that the physics of the colour of stars is both interesting and
poetic. I won't go into it in too much depth here, in part because I'm not
as familiar with the subject as I'd like to be, but I'll briefly stop to walk
through some of the core concepts.

We can begin by stating someone that many of you will already be aware of or
have noticed: when you heat things up, if they get hot enough they glow. This
is easily demonstrated: for example, place a metal object into a fire for
a period of time. Left long enough, it will begin to glow red.

If you experiment with enough care, you'll begin to find that the colour
something glows depends on how hot you get it. As you heat that metal object
further it'll begin to get whiter, passing through orange and yellow along the
way.

This pair of observations would lead a sufficiently adventurous mind to
suggest that there is probably a relationship between how hot something is and
the colour it glows. If you add to this our knowledge of the
[electromagnetic spectrum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EM_spectrum), you
might be able to extend your hypothesis a little further. For instance, you
could say that a hotter object appears to be a colour of shorter wavelength
than a cooler object. If you were really bold, that would lead you to conclude
that even when objects don't appear to be glowing, they are still 'glowing' in
the infrared, which manifests to our senses as heat.

The next few steps are less obvious, and I shall have to state them rather
than give you examples. First, we invoke the theoretical construct of the
['perfect blackbody'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blackbody). This is an
idealised (read: cannot exist) object that absorbs perfectly. Because physics
is full of lots of exciting symmetries, a blackbody also radiates perfectly.
Stars, as it turns out, are excellent approximations of perfect blackbodies,
and so you can model the way they emit light as being the same as a perfect
blackbody (almost).

[Max Planck](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Planck), a very renowned
physicist, proposed a law (specifically an equation) that describes the way
perfect blackbodies radiate at a given temperature. This law is called
[Planck's Law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck%27s_law). For the purposes
of this discussion, it can be summarised in the following points:

1. For an object of a given temperature, there is a maximum possible frequency
   of light that can be emitted.

2. For an object of a given temperature, there is a frequency of light that is
   emitted more than any other.

3. Hotter objects radiate more light in total than cooler objects.

4. Frequencies of light below the maximum are always emitted in some quantity,
   depending on how hot the object is.

From these points we can explain 95% of the colours of stars. Cool stars do
not emit any blue light at all, because blue light has a higher frequency than
red light, and they're too cold. Cool stars, therefore, appear red. The hotter
they are, the more of the higher frequencies they emit, and the bluer they
get.

This series of observations leads to the relationship between star colour and
star temperature, and incidentally explains the way things behave on earth
too.

#### You said 95%?

I did. So, here's a thing. If you go look at the
[Planck's Law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck%27s_law) page again, you'll
notice that what I said in point 2 above applies right through the spectrum.
As a result, there is a temperature of star that radiates mostly green light:
around 6000 Kelvin, in fact. The Sun's surface temperature for the purpose of
blackbody calculations is about 5780K, which means the Sun radiates mostly
green light. Why, then, don't we see the Sun as green, but instead as white?
Furthermore, given how average our Sun is, why don't we see any green stars at
all?

To answer this question, we have to go interdisciplinary, and turn to our
friends, the Biologists. Specifically, we have to consider the theory of
evolution.

We evolved on this planet, with our Sun as the sole source of light. In
particular, our eyes evolved in an environment where the light emitted by our
Sun was the sole source of light available to them. Given that the Sun emits
more green light than any other colour, it is evolutionarily advantageous to
become more sensitive to green light than other colours, as there will always
be more of it to detect.

Put more simply, evolution means that our eyes have what physicists and
mathematicians would call a *non-linear response to luminous intensity*: we
are more sensitive to some colours than others. Thus, what we perceive as
'white light' is not an equal mixture of all wavelengths of light, but
contains more of some than others.

If we had eyes that were equally sensitive at all wavelengths, we would end
up seeing stars of all colours, green included. This bit of information
provides the final clue to the colours of stars.
