## I Don't Have Time For Your Sexism

I've refrained from writing anything about the problem of gender and sexism in
tech because, honestly, I was hoping I wouldn't need to. I was hoping that the
recent increase in the profile of this issue would mean that the whole thing
would blow over, and so I could just sit here quietly and not bother myself.

In the words of XKCD, **Fuck**. **That**. **Shit**.

I'm officially done with it. I'm sick of working in an industry which is, by
its nature, gender-blind, yet being surrounded by almost entirely men. I've
never met a woman in this industry who wasn't better at what they do than I am.
But that's to be expected, when the smart money says that less than 10% of the
industry is female: you have to be excellent just to survive. And even the
women who are unquestionably excellent
([hi Ashe](http://ashedryden.com/blog/we-deserve-better-than-this)) at what
they do suffer from the appalling immaturity and sexism of some of the men in
this industry.

I have the wonderful pleasure of not having personally worked with anyone who
has behaved so obnoxiously, but consider this a statement: if I'm ever at a
conference with you, or if I'm working on a project with you, or even just
sharing a drink with you in the pub, I expect you to treat everyone in this
industry with the respect they deserve.

And if you have the _gall_ to treat anyone as less than they are, I reserve the
right to call you out on your crap, and then drag your name through the mud on
the internet as much as I possibly can.

I'm not sitting by any longer. I know I'm late to the party that people like
Ashe, and [Faruk](http://farukat.es/journal/2013/02/681-silence), and
[Sarah](http://www.sazzy.co.uk/2013/02/speaking-up/), and
[Aaron](http://aaron.vegh.ca/2013/02/girl-trouble/), have been at for so long,
but I'm here now.

In the meantime, I'm going to throw my support behind anything that helps
increase the number of women in the industry. For instance, I recommend you
check out (and promote) [Ladies Learning Code](http://ladieslearningcode.com/).

Let's fix this. Let's not stay quiet any longer.
