## The Importance of Respect

While chatting in IRC with [Eric Holscher](http://ericholscher.com/) tonight
the topic of conversation wound its way toward positivity and the need to
encourage it. I pointed out that my newest project,
[hyper](http://hyper.rtfd.org/en/latest/), has as part of its contributor
guidelines a
[section about respect](http://hyper.readthedocs.org/en/development/contributing.html#all-contributions).
I wanted to talk briefly about why I wrote this, and why I think it's
important enough to warrant an explicit mention in contributor's guides.

Before I do, I should note that while I wrote hyper's guide in isolation, there
are some other projects that have similar provisions. Of particular note are
[Pylons](http://docs.pylonsproject.org/en/latest/community/conduct.html) and
[Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/about/about-ubuntu/conduct), both of which are
substantially larger than hyper is and have commensurately more substantial
guidelines. These are good places to get inspiration for your own projects,
though I feel that hyper's has a simplicity about it that is helpful.

My personal projects are small: I'm not the kind of developer that releases a
project and gets tons of contributors. hyper's had several hugely important
contributions from kind folks, but it remains a small project. Certainly it's
not at a size where I've had any kind of difficulty with contributors.

So why did I write that set of guidelines if it's not something I think I need
right now? Two reasons: culture, and security.

Let's deal with culture first. Culture is difficult to define and harder still
to quantify, and establishing it early is important. In open source,
establishing the culture of a project is particularly critical: it defines the
project in a way that nothing else does. Projects live and die based on their
culture. The culture of a project affects what its priorities are and how
successful it will ultimately be.

To that end, my highest priority for hyper is for it to be a welcoming project.
I want it to be a space where people feel comfortable contributing. Open source
contribution is always nerve-wracking, especially if you've never done it
before. It's hugely important to me that hyper be seen as a place where it is
safe to volunteer your efforts: where you won't be ridiculed or treated like an
idiot. To truly give this impression it needs to be a core part of the culture
of hyper.

The second part is, if anything, more important. Assuming hyper becomes
successful (by no means guaranteed), at some stage someone will volunteer a
contribution and, in doing so, behave in a manner that shows disrespect for
someone else.

When this happens, it's hugely useful to have a policy in place to which you
can point. It's important to have this policy in place _before_ you need it.
These policies exist for exactly one reason: to make it totally clear that
certain kinds of behaviour are unacceptable. In addition to providing a good
reference point (letting you say that "you should have known that was
unacceptable, it's in the contributor's guide"), it protects the maintainers by
depersonalising the response. When I say "Listen, you have to apologise for
that or I'm going to refuse your contributions", it's helpful to be able to
demonstrate that this is not a personal vendetta.

Having this policy gives me comfort. I know that I've taken steps to protect
people who volunteer their time and effort, and I know that I've taken steps
to ensure that toxic contributors can be handled gently, without making it
personal. This is a great place to be, and I believe that it will improve the
chances of hyper's success. If you're running a project, I strongly suggest you
consider a similar clause.
